there's trouble in paradise nations in
the South Pacific are sick of us simply
thinking of them as sunny playgrounds
for postcard holidays many have
significant problems which threaten
their very existence in the last few
months Scott Morrison has been trying to
convince leaders around the Pacific that
Australia is looking out for them and
wants to help but the Prime Minister
isn't receiving much thanks in return
and that's because China is on the march
and seems prepared to splash more of its
cash in the region how it's doing that
though as we discovered is alarming at
times
sinister right now in the Pacific seeing
red has a lot of people seeing red two
months ago
the Pacific nation of Carabas switched
its allegiance from Taiwan to communist
China so this is very clearly somebody
talen ism we're not being paranoid now
as the first foreign journalists to try
to report his sense we're under
surveillance
then house arrest three and a half
thousand kilometres west in the Solomon
Islands a glimpse of how China might by
its alliances in the Pacific so they
rang you and said we've got a million
dollars for you if you come to the hotel
and accept the switch to China yes and
just to the north in war-torn
Bougainville with its legendary gold
mine we reveal a Chinese master plan you
would be quite happy to do business with
China oh yes how do you describe China's
actions in the Pacific one word
expansionist
captain Jim Finnell was the intelligence
chief of the US Navy's Pacific Fleet
watching China's moves there on a daily
basis now he's warning Pacific nations
swaying to China's influence to be where
China has told all these Pacific
countries that it just wants to be their
partner who wants to be involved
economically do you not believe them
well we have evidence that shows that
when they say they want to be your
economic partner the end result is they
become your economic master China
demands no country in its diplomatic
sphere can recognize Taiwan and there's
no doubt the communist superpower has a
grand strategic plan in the Pacific
extending its alliances further and
further south and with those alliances
massive infrastructure like this
gigantic Wharf in Vanuatu that the
country doesn't need but could dock an
aircraft carrier with recent
back-to-back recognition of China by the
Solomon Islands and Carabas and possibly
the soon to be independent Bougainville
we asked Jim Finnell to join us on a
Pacific mission to report on China's
intentions
they're interested in this area because
it's essentially the lifeline or the the
choke point between America and
Australia and New Zealand China has
built the Navy that people said they
were never going to build China has
deployed their fleet to places they said
they were never going to deploy they
believe that they're supposed to be the
the rightful leaders of this new global
order you know the British century the
American Century now we're going to have
the Chinese century that's their vision
in September Menace Isayev are a prime
minister of the Solomon Islands
announced his country was ditching
recognition of Taiwan chosen to be on
the right side of history the Communist
China a move deputy opposition leader
Peter Ken alehrer
says was more a dash for cash than
considered diplomacy are you happy that
your country has switched allegiances
from a democracy to a communist state
for me personally I'm not we should have
taken our time and not be dictated and
marching to the beats of a more dominant
country is really China first not
Solomon's first and here in the Solomons
we found direct evidence the China's
influence could have a sinister side so
they rang you and said we've got a
million dollars for you if you come to
the hotel and accept the switch to China
yes Daniel Sudan II is the premier of
the Solomons largest island Malita
he says he was offered a million dollar
bribe to back his country switch to
China you're suggesting that there are a
lot of corrupt politicians in your
government yes
[Music]
but a million dollars just to be
pro-chinese I mean that's a hell of a
way to do business
oh it is it is a new way of doing things
it's really dangerous
you think there's one bag of money it's
got to be more oh yeah yeah
they don't come an old single weeks
ahead of our visit we requested an
interview with the Solomons Prime
Minister about his sudden recognition of
China while we're here we try again in
person also wanting to ask him about his
refusal to investigate the bribery
allegations made by premier sue Danny as
we're waiting a high-level Chinese
delegation leaves the Prime Minister's
office then hot on their heels
Menace a saga VAR a himself hurries out
head down and clearly in no mood to talk
mr. Prime Minister 60 minutes Australia
sir we just like to ask you a couple of
questions about China mr. prime minister
mr. prime minister can we ask you about
the bribery money please
amid all the claims of bribery
corruption and kickbacks
it appears the Chinese have another
novel approach to increasing their
presence here like leasing this entire
island of Tuilagi for the next 75 years
old ten square kilometers of it
including the deepwater port oil and gas
rights fishing rights forestry rights
and tourism rights the Chinese want all
of it and the locals are not impressed
when I heard about it I thought that
China is a communist country and we the
Solomon Islands is a democratic country
Margaret Manu is an unlikely enemy for
China to make but here on Tuilagi where
land ownership is matrilineal she's the
voice of her people and the people here
didn't want to be owned by the Chinese
60 minutes has obtained a copy of the
lease document which is almost comical
if it wasn't so sinister the agreement
was signed by two ladies provincial
leader who locals say hasn't been seen
here since and luckily for Margaret and
her people it was ruled unlawful when it
became public so there was no
consultation so the Chinese company just
came in here and tried to have the
agreement signed by one person and that
was it
that's what happened without that people
knowing what's going on
and what we're seeing now from our
visits to the islands here is that the
Chinese are coming in with soft power in
lots of cash to buy out local officials
to gain access to ports and airfields
and resources that give them controlling
monopoly in the islands and thus give
them control over this vital sea lane
coming up not welcome in paradise we're
being followed by a government car why
the government of pure of us there's
something to do with the kinds of money
that's being brought in doesn't like
nosy reporters that's next of 60 minutes
there's something both threatening and
absurd about being tailed by a
mysterious black sedan in a country that
essentially has only one road it's
mid-morning on our first day in Carabas
the latest Pacific island nation to
recognize Communist China and dump
Taiwan we're being followed by a
government car now whether that's curvas
government or whether that's somebody
from the government operating under
Chinese instruction who knows
very very strange thing to happen in a
place like this with us is Captain Jim
Finnell former intelligence chief of the
US Navy's Pacific Fleet and someone
who's witnessed firsthand how China does
business in the Pacific it could be that
the Chinese have said as part of this
deal you're gonna have to pay more
restrict attention to who's here and
what they're doing few foreign
journalists come here
none since the country's abrupt switch
of allegiance to China one reason is
that Carabas requires a draconian film
permit that journalists working in the
region say is almost never granted and
gives the government the right to
completely censor any news reports we
know we may meet trouble but have come
anyway
a move we'll soon find is supported by
very senior figures in Pyramus is
basically house arrest on arrival at our
hotel were immediately placed under
house arrest and threatened with
imprisonment
his pupils transmitted to self we are
the sensitivities are running high here
because Pyramus is critically important
to China's Pacific master plan the
immense swathe of Ocean Territory
controlled by this tiny island nation is
smack in the middle of a secure sea lane
China wants to establish all the way to
the Antarctic which it calls the blue
economic passage so you think this blue
economic passage as China puts it is is
just the cover story it's just the start
of what they want to do it's the start
of a comprehensive plan that they have
to dominate the region and at first it's
with economic development but it will be
followed by fishing fleets and maritime
law enforcement and then eventually
naval forces back at our hotel two very
high-level visitors have demanded access
to us despite the government agents
guarding the entrance these guys have
told us if we do anything they've made
it quite clear today that if we leave
the front door of this hotel will be put
into a cell my target is the president
the man on the right is Pyramus as
founding father and first president sir
era meyer to buy one of the most
respected men in the south pacific with
him his Carabas
opposition leader tissa boo to Bonnie in
this interview secretly filmed with
their permission these senior figures
told us we were right to come here
without a permit also telling us there's
media repression in their countries
which has become more hardline since the
current government's recognition of
China I'm not surprised you know this is
the action of a communist country no
Genting us-bound sir era Maya and mr. t
Bonnie also told us the Chinese doled
out two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars cash around these islands within
weeks of Kira buses recognition of
Beijing what sort of democratic country
spies on journalists and puts them under
house arrest we embarrassed to be part
of that night will you be able to come
to our aid if we get chucked in them so
well it'll at least there's a little bit
of democracy left on care of us perhaps
safeguarded by the presence of these two
men we were merely deported from
Cubist's back to the Solomon Islands
the following day why do you think the
cure of US government is so paranoid
about media crews telling the story of
what's going on there well I think it's
pretty clear that there's something to
do with the kinds of money that's being
brought in how that money's being
distributed obviously would be something
that they would probably not want people
to know about or hear about
[Music]
and on the very day we arrived back in
the Solomons an immense deal is
announced for Chinese control of the
country's only gold mine
high above Honiara this is the goldrich
mine
it's an old gold mine that's been
resurrected in the first major deal the
Solomon Islands has done with China
since it switched allegiances to the
communist country incredibly China
describes the 825 million dollar
purchase and all the infrastructure it
intends to build here as an early
harvest and if you need evidence of
advance Chinese planning we're told by a
mine insider that the security guards
uniforms complete with communist China's
flag were ordered six months ago even
though the diplomatic recognition that
opened the way to this deal was only two
months ago the Chinese will not only
reap the direct profits from this gold
mine but everything they build to
service it roads railways and port
facilities will remain in China's hands
forever but just across the water
there's potentially an even more
glittering prize coming up that is truly
enormous
reasons when the biggest man-made hits
in the world that Chinese want this
piece of Bougainville China is now
taking control of the South Pacific and
why Australia is the big loser hysteria
is making enemy other Bougainville
that's next on 60 minutes on our tour of
the Pacific we'd find conclusive proof
of China's long-term planning for our
region
we're in Bougainville still part of
Papua New Guinea but not for long
next week it votes in a referendum on
its independence Bougainville was one of
the Forgotten campaigns of World War two
but 516 Australians died here during the
war 516 put that in context for me well
that's comparable to Vietnam but veteran
journalist Benbow Haines covered a far
bloodier conflict here
the Bougainville civil war where a rebel
army fought New Guinea for independence
and control of the fabulously wealthy
Panguna gold mine over 10,000 people
died between 1988 and 1998 they're given
a small population here safe to say
virtually every single family would have
been affected one way or the other in
small places like this every family was
touched by the war
one of the commanders of the
Bougainville rebel army was general Sam
:
fully patient they they make war and we
play the war now Benbow hain and I are
headed to meet the general at his
headquarters in the south of
Bougainville main island it's hard to
imagine fighting a war in this terrain
harder still to imagine the
infrastructure required to bring this
place into the 21st century
once it achieves independence but if it
does general Kona is one of the leading
contenders to become its first president
supported by his formidable wife Jo see
the general how confident are you that
Bougainville will become independent I
am sure I've seen if I'm going around
the island north or south scene and have
people expressing their feelings their
views you've been campaigning
relentlessly haven't you oh yes oh yes
to make sure that they vote for
independence but central to any hope
Bergen Vil has of becoming a
self-sustaining nation lies deep inland
it's golden heart the mine called
Panguna Benbow hain and i are being
given rare access to this legendary
place however look at that that is truly
enormous one of the biggest man-made
pits in the world
it's estimated Panguna still holds
nearly 60 billion dollars worth of gold
and copper so that's what the war was
all about and the future here too I
guess
yeah this is the mine that triggered the
war and may well be key to the future of
Bougainville
it's an eerie place a frozen moment of
the aftermath of water
we make the Panguna rebel commander
moses poppy ro who shows us the massive
safe where the mines gold was once store
now welded shut
it contains the weapons his men laid
down for peace how many weapons but if
Bougainville is denied its independence
by Papua New Guinea which has to ratify
the referendum vote Moses as a Samba
warning Moses is there any way in which
those weapons would be used again when
you see maybe boys coming again or we
don't know in truth it's unthinkable but
war will revisit this devastated place
but restoring it to production seems
almost equally impossible this mine is
set to be the beating heart of a new
Bougainville Republic and the blood
pumping through it is destined to be
foreign sourced the big question is will
China win this - bogan will know is
starting on a clean slate we will be
looking at all our news what about China
China inclusive yes China is the
superpower in the world we are free
Bougainville is free to be choosing
whichever countries that we can have the
best deal with on the eve of the
independence vote an extraordinary
revelation by general Konev a detailed
plan for the complete infrastructure
rebuild of the island and the plan is
Chinese
the first OVA has come from China this
year with us we are still waiting for
Australian Oprah USA offer over how they
could support Bougainville roads ports
and Airport
all to be built by China but the general
is adamant it's only because Australia
and the US have offered nothing of the
sort
Australia even refused the general a
visa an almost unforgivable insult
you're saying if Australia is truly
genuine you want an apology and you want
us to do more now that's why I feel
Australia is making an enemy out of sin
Australia is making enemy out of
Bougainville when they give me the
treatment observing this with us is
Captain Jim Finnell the former
intelligence commander of the US Pacific
Fleet who's been with us on this trip
there's been no previous inkling that
China has such a long term master plan
for Bougainville and as our last stop
it's alarming news for this experienced
China watcher if Bougainville becomes
the world's newest country that's quite
a prize for China as now yes it is and
it sets up but with the the flip that
Kier Abbas and the flip in the Solomons
and what they're doing in Vanuatu what
they're doing in Fiji you start to see a
trend line here which is that China is
now taking control of the South Pacific
and so I think that's why you're
starting to see some change in the
United States for instance and even in
your own government in Australia where
people are starting to say if we don't
stand up and check China's expansionism
we will be ruled by them in another 25
or 30 years hello I'm Liam Bartlet
thanks for watching so keep up with the
latest from 60 minutes Australia make
sure you subscribe to our channel you
can also download the 9 now app for full
episodes and other exclusive 60 minutes
content